Analysis of Market Fare for Commerical Air Travel Over 240 Dollars

This is a final project for Stat 303-2: Data Science with Python, at Northwestern University. The project consisted of obtaining a dataset and using prediction techniques in Python to train an accurate model for that dataset. The HTML files contain a writeup and all the Python code used in the project.

The dataset I chose for this project was from the US Department of Transportation, and it is titled “Consumer Airfare Report: Table 5 - Detailed Fare Information For Highest and Lowest Fare Markets Under 750 Miles”. The Department of Transportation publishes a quarterly Domestic Airline Fares Consumer Report, which includes a dataset with detailed fare and passenger data for all city-pairs with a stage length of less than 750 miles that have average fares above $240.

In this analysis, I aimed to understand the relationship between various consumer and flight statistics and the market fare for commercial flights over $240, and to develop models to accurately predict future market fares. A non-linear model using Ridge regression and cross-validation produced a mean absolute error of $12.52, while an inference polynomial regression model explained 92.8% of the variation in market fares. Key predictors included Year, in interaction with variables such as carrier’s minimum passenger share and carrier type, as well as carrier average fare. Smaller airlines were associated with lower fares. Recommendations for passengers include buying tickets early to avoid price increases and considering average airline prices when choosing tickets. Airlines should monitor predictors with significant interaction terms with Year and consider amenities that justify their average fares. These findings can help optimize pricing strategies, manage fleet composition, and target promotions effectively.
